---
layout: post
title: Is Gen AI at the peak of a hype cycle?
description: Description 
published: false
categories: [Product] # choose from [AIML, Career, Data Science, Design, Diagrams, Guides, Product, Research, Web3]
tags: [products] # choose from [web3, ds, problem-solving, ?, career, ML, data science, thoughts, trends, products, Misc]
excerpt_separator: <!--end-->
---

I recently drove on Highway 101 up to San Francisco, and along the way I saw billboards after billboards filled with "AI-powered" this and that, promising unprecedented productivity boost via the power of LLMs by all kinds of SaaS companies. As someone who works in the AI/ML field, I can't help but wonder, __are we at the peak of a gen AI hype cycle?__ <!--end-->

To be clear, I agree that generative models are much more capable than their older deep learning cousins, and with the cat (transformers) out of the bag, the rate of innovation in the field will only accelerate. However, I feel like there is too much emphasis on AI as the end-all and be-all solution to all problems faced by everyone. AI is a tool, just like a hammer is a tool that accomplishes a job, and we shouldn't focus on AI as _the thing_, and rather focus on what _job_ AI can help us do. 

The HBR article, "[Know Your Customers' 'Jobs to Be Done'](https://hbr.org/2016/09/know-your-customers-jobs-to-be-done)", has a quote that's relevant to my point.

>When we buy a product, we essentially “hire” it to help us do a job. If it does the job well, we hire it again. If it does a crummy job, we “fire” it and look for something else to solve the problem. 

For some reason, many companies think that having gen AI alone will be a major differentiator and revenue booster, as if people hear AI and their problems are miraculously solved.

“Job” is shorthand for what an individual really seeks to accomplish in a given circumstance.

The circumstances are more important than customer characteristics, product attributes, new technologies, or trends.

Good innovations solve problems that formerly had only inadequate solutions—or no solution. 

Jobs are multifaceted. They're never simply about function; they have powerful social and emotional dimensions.